---
image: "/images/uploads/2025/02/edmund_blair_leighton_-_the_wedding_register.jpg"
title: "The Ring"
date: 2025-02-16
categories: 
  - "creative-writing"
  - "literature"
tags: 
  - "narratives"
  - "short-story"
  - "the-ring"
  - "writing"
---

_Author: Eva McFarlane_

Encased in my perfect velvet box, I had lain in wait for the question to be popped; for the flooding of joyous tears to resound with a heartfelt ‘yes.’

I was displayed proudly for some time behind polished glass for the right young man with lovesick eyes and a boyish grin to come along. There was nothing to do but gaze out longingly as I watched those before me being chosen; I was jealous, to say the least.

However, when I finally saw him, I knew he was the one.

As the door chime played out, signalling the process had begun, the sales assistant Anne stepped towards him like a hawk swooping in for the kill. We all knew why he was there; they all had the same lost, boyish look of uncertainty in their eyes, especially when faced with so many options to choose from. Of course, the right choice was _me_, though far too many lacked the intelligence to realise such a fact.

Anne’s tight brown curls bobbed up and down as she nodded along with her, her fake retail smile plastered on her makeup-caked face as the two glided down row after row of engagement rings less worthy than I.

_Look at me._ I demanded as I put on my best shine, making it so that when he brushed down my row he would not walk past.

“Wait.” He said, his eyes drawn instantly to me. I winked at him, watching the twinkle in my 18ct stone reflecting in his deep blue eyes. He was transfixed, I could tell. “How much?” He asked.

Anne told him a price far below what I believe my true worth to be. Regardless, it heightened his attention. His eyes shone back at me, smile widened in true Cheshire Cat fashion.

Before I knew it, I was his!

\*\*\*

I was nestled comfortably in his jeans pocket. I watched earlier as he meticulously chose the perfect outfit; a green and white striped crew neck, paired with a black pair of jeans he had spent half an hour mulling over. Come 8 o’clock, he was ready to pick her up.

And then, there was _her,_ Dana.

I could not see her from my hiding place, but could hear her and him and the way they talked to one another. I could feel the crease of his jeans against my velvet box as he leant in for a kiss, there was the soft giggling of young love fluttering around the air. Then, the sound of waves crashing out at sea, of gulls hovering overhead in preparation to infiltrate whatever meal they could find.

“Tommy, are you feeling okay?” I heard Dana ask, worry visible in her voice. He told her he was fine, but she could read him like a clairvoyant can read palms.

‘I like her already, she does not back down,’ I had thought to myself. He was not ready, though I could feel him digging in his pocket for me, fishing my box out through trembling, sweat-greased fingers.

It was happening. Internally, I had started screaming as the moment I had been waiting for finally reached fruition.

I hoped that Anne had polished me properly. Oh, how I would have just _died_ if there was even a hint of wear on my perfectly golden band!

Darkness became evaded as the soft glow of a warm summer’s night unravelled to me. The sea breeze blew in Dana’s long honey-blonde hair as shock turned to excitement, then to pure and utter happiness. Through her blubbering tears, she squeaked out a ‘yes’ and the couple embraced, entangling into one before I was slid onto Dana’s perfectly slender finger.

“I love you.” The couple said in unison before intertwined giggles rose into the night, their hearts filled with happiness.

Standing under a streetlight, I watched as Dana took the time to inspect my beauty, hold me up against the sickeningly orange glow towering down at us.

That night, I glinted and sparkled; I believe I could have put a fully decorated Christmas tree to shame, easily!

She shone back at me with her tear sparkled eyes, bearing her straight, pearly white teeth at me.

“Perfect,” she said.

_Thank you,_ I wanted to say back at her, _it feels nice to_ be recognised.

\*\*\*

As the months passed and Dana and I became well acquainted, the moment we had both been waiting for finally arrived.

She glided down the aisle like a swan through water, a picture of true elegance that captivated the attention of everyone in the room.

I shone with anticipation, listening to the vows being uttered. The church fell into a silent trance of awe and wonderment until at last, the rings were exchanged.

If I were a living person, I would have been holding in my breath as the moment— my moment finally came to fruition. The wedding ring slid in beside me, shining modestly, captivating me nonetheless.

“So…” The wedding ring began, chasing away the awkwardness threatening to wedge between us. “Been waiting here long?”

“Oh, it was worth it.” I replied between the cheer of the crowd. The happy couple descended down the aisle with beaming smiles that almost— almost, put my shine to shame.

_Eva McFarlane is a graduate of Edinburgh Napier University with a BA (Hons) degree in English, she is a current student in the MA Creative Writing programme. Originally from Edinburgh, she enjoys all writing with a Gothic twist, primarily within the dark fantasy and horror genres. An aspiring journalist, she has completed a two-month internship at Thesocialtalks and is eager to combine her love for literature and her journalistic skills. She is also a poet, with her first poem The Men they could have been published in summer 2024 in the Whitburn Gala Programme. Additionally, Eva has recently completed her first poetry manuscript and is eager to get published while she also works on her novel The Corpse Road._
